---
layout: news.html
title: PROVOCATIVE PROPOSAL
title_name: Intended to guide decisions
footer: © P3
sidebar: ../../assets/images/sidebar-news.png
text_path: Topics / Citizenship education
logo_path: "../../assets/images/p3logo.png"
button: [
  {
    type_button: "Home",
    link: "#"
  },
  {
    type_button: "News",
    link: "#"
  },
  {
    type_button: "Topics",
    link: "#"
  },
  {
    type_button: "Archive",
    link: "#"
  },
  {
    type_button: "Contributors",
    link: "#"
  },
  {
    type_button: "Contact us",
    link: "#"
  }
]
---
# PROVOCATIVE PROPOSAL: Citizenship education should be abandoned

**Artemisia Jenkinson, 28 May 2009**

## The beginnings of citizenship education

The first seeds of citizenship education were sown by the political theorist Bernard Crick in his 1998 report entitled 'Education for citizenship and the teaching of democracy in schools' (hitherto referred to as the Crick Report):

‘We aim at no less than a change in the political culture of this country both nationally and locally: for people to think of themselves as active citizens, willing, able and equipped to have influence in public life.' (Crick et al. 1998: 7).

The powerful intent of this statement is clear. Crick, who was a fervent democratic socialist, had published his report at the perfect time – it struck a chord with the ideals of the recently elected New Labour party who promptly turned theory into practice. In August 2002 compulsory Citizenship Education lessons were introduced for every student in every school in England.

While the time taken to develop and introduce the new subject was remarkable, the most alarming aspect of the process was really that it involved virtually no serious debate. Various aspects of the new subject have since come under scrutiny – including the teaching standards and the choice of components to be taught – but the assumption on which citizenship education is based has been largely ignored. It is astonishing that the entire education sector – teachers' unions, examination bodies, political parties and pressure groups – embraced the new subject without questioning first whether education was and is in fact the most appropriate means of curing the much-documented alienation of Britain's youth from the world of politics.

### Assessing citizenship's success

Seven years since the subject was first introduced into Britain's schools, we are now in a better position to appraise Citizenship Education.

The primary aim of the concept was an extension of that embodied in Bernard Crick's statement above - to encourage youth participation in the political process, but there is little evidence that it has had any effect at all. Neither the local elections of 2007 nor the general elections of 2005 showed any increase in first-time voter turnout. Further, research carried out by the British Youth Council suggests the number of young people involved in campaign and pressure groups has never reached much beyond two per cent.

Looking at comparisons with similar schemes beyond Britain's borders do not reassure either. America's potential voting youth seem even less keen to vote than their British counterparts, despite the USA having had a civics curriculum for over twenty years. Likewise Australia, whose civics programme has been much praised, is currently experiencing a downward trend in its youth voting numbers.

This evidence overwhelmingly leads to the conclusion that citizenship education simply does not work. Political apathy cannot be corrected through citizenship and therefore the roots of this indifference must lie elsewhere. Indeed, many doubt whether there is any kind of correlation between political illiteracy and apathy. In my experience working as a politics teacher in a British secondary school, I have come across many students who are clearly very knowledgeable and aware when it comes to our politics, but would still choose not to vote.

### Telling students what, not how, to think

So why is it that the lessons have so far been ineffective? Perhaps the problem lies in the content of the curriculum itself.

A superficial glance at the Citizenship curriculum may not reveal much beyond the presentation of rather bland values like tolerance and honesty, but closer inspection exposes the presentation of more specific, yet unproven, ideas as fact. These viewpoints are being taught as universal moral values on which students are intended to model their own beliefs and action. Among them are many which, far from being universal values, are actually political perspectives, several of which – including sustainability and caring for the environment - remain quite controversial.

Students are being expected to accept these values as gospel, rather than taking the opportunity to be engaged in discussion. Ironically, as a consequence, this depletion of intellectual content means the average Citizenship lesson does not resemble how the political process should be at all.

A classic example is how the topic of climate change is presented. Instead of being introduced as a scientific and political issue in which humanity's relationship with nature and the various possible responses can be debated, it has been presented as a fact, and the steps needed to counteract it are laid out as if they were entirely clear and concrete.

The Education Secretary, Alan Johnson, best summarised New Labour's moralising vision of Citizenship Education when he asserted that instilling the next generation with an appreciation of the way human actions can help or hinder the environment will encourage a culture change that “could quite literally save the world”. (Johnson 2.2.2007).

### Citizenship education: a symbol of a broken system

Supporters of Citizenship Education will no doubt claim that something is better than nothing and that my appraisal of the subject falls short because it makes no alternative suggestions as to how political interest in the nation's youth could be kindled. What's more, they may suggest my vision of an improved education system which engages young people more dynamically is utopic and impractical.

When young voter apathy is at an all-time low, it is clear that something must be done and I respect that Citizenship Education for at least trying to take a step in the right direction. However, I believe that it is actually taking us further in the wrong direction and will only exacerbate the problems in the long-term. What is presented is a trivialisation of the main concepts of citizenship completely at odds with the way political participation operates in reality. The emphasis switches from the discussion and debate of ideas to the mere ideal of banal 'participation'.

On a wider scale, despite the contrary claims that advocates of the subject make, Citizenship Education is in reality symptomatic of the general malaise in modern British politics.

It is the duty of the politician to directly inspire our youth with the ideals of good leadership and a fair society, but schemes such as Citizenship Education conveniently bypass this responsibility. This tells us a lot about our politicians’' lack of confidence in the current political system.

To summarise, the following are reasons we should abolish Citizenship Education:

1\. It is unable to resolve the crisis of British politics.

2\. It allows politicians to be complacent.

3\. It is authoritarian and anti-intellectual: it seeks to convince the young of what is right, rather than encourage critical thinking.

### About the author

Artemisia Jenkinson teaches politics and sociology at Princes’ School, Swansea and is responsible for their citizenship education programme. She also writes for several political and educational journals in the UK and Ireland. She contributed sections on citizenship education to the 2008 edition of The Compendium of Key Educational Issues.

### References

Crick, B. et al. (1998). Education for Citizenship and the Teaching of Democracy in Schools. London, Qualifications and Curriculum Authority.

Johnson, A. (2.2.2007). ‘Children must think differently’. The Independent.
