---
layout: minimalist.html
title: Caledoniancrow
logo-center: true
content-align: left
logo-path: ../../assets/images/caledoniancrow-logo.png
---
## Brief outline of current research into the tool use of New Caledonian crows

_Many animals use tools, but tool manufacture is rare._ Cumulative change in tool manufacture over time is even rarer. _Chimpanzee and orangutan tool manufacture, for example, is often haphazard, and their tools show no evidence of incremental improvements over time._ In contrast, current human technology is the result of a long series of cumulative changes. This technological evolution means that design changes are retained at the population level until new, improved designs arise. This is possible because tool manufacture methods are socially transmitted with sufficient fidelity that individuals do not need to reinvent or recapitulate past inefficient designs. The skills required for the development of this cumulative technology are claimed to include high-fidelity social learning, an understanding of physical relationships and functional properties of objects, and the ability for fine object manipulation. Animals other than humans are generally presumed to lack the necessary neural hardware and cognitive sophistication for cumulative technological evolution.

The New Caledonian crow, Corvus moneduloides, is an ideal model species to examine the links between tool manufacture, social learning and cognition. These crows manufacture two types of tool to facilitate the capture of invertebrates: one tool is manufactured from twigs and similar material, and the other tool is made from the long barbed edges of the leaves of the Pandanus plant. _The manufacture of pandanus tools provides a unique opportunity for study because a record of tool manufacture is faithfully recorded in ‘counterparts’ or outlines remaining on the leaf edges._ Our recent work has revealed that these tools have four features previously thought to be unique to hominids: (i) a high degree of standardization; (ii) the use of hooks: (iii) “handedness”; and (iv) cumulative changes in tool design over time. We discovered evidence of cumulative changes in a field survey documenting the shapes of 5,550 tools from 21 sites throughout the range of pandanus tools. We found three distinct tool designs: wide tools, narrow tools, and stepped tools. The lack of ecological correlates of the different tool designs and their geographic overlap make it unlikely that they evolved independently. Similarities in the method of manufacture for each design suggest that pandanus tools have gone through a process of cumulative change from a common historical origin.

To date we have good if circumstantial evidence that New Caledonian crows socially transmit tool-making knowledge. These crows live in small family units where juveniles have ample opportunity to learn foraging techniques. The social learning and reasoning abilities of other Corvus species are well documented. _The high fidelity in the shape of tool design at sites makes individual trial-and-error learning unlikely. Similarly, the evidence that crows might have some grasp of the functional properties of their tools is growing but still also only inferential._ Other species of crow, however, do not show these traits- leading to questions as to the genetic basis of tool-making behaviour in the New Caledonian Crow. The genetic basis of this behaviour is completely unknown.

One possibility is that numerous changes in genes across a wide range of functional domains are required for the evolution of complex intelligence. Alternatively, only a limited number of genetic tweaks might be required. The New Caledonian crow offers a highly suitable model to investigate the genetics of complex cognition. Distinct local variation exists in NC crows’ tool skills that is potentially associated with phenotypic as well as cultural differences. This exciting multi-disciplinary project combines genetics and behavioural ecology to search for genes that underpin a tool-using lifestyle. This work will involve documenting variation in the tool behaviour of NC crows across selected sites, in combination with catching and banding birds and collecting blood samples from them.
