---
layout: minimalist.html
title: The Arlington Review - Coming Soon Films
content-align: left
logo_path: ../../assets/images/title.jpg
video_path: http://www.youtube.com/embed/YOavDSErmak
---
# Big Eyes, Big Hit

## Tim Burton's unsettling new film tells the story of the macabre Big Eyes paintings

They say that eyes are the gateway into the soul, and none are more so than those that features in Tim Burton's new film, Big Eyes. For his latest release, the master of the macabre has turned to the unsettling world of the once-married couple, Margaret and Walter Keane, who rose to fame in the 1950s and '60s with their paintings of eerie, doe-eyed children. In hindsight, the children, sugary-sweet yet sinister, seem to reflect the two faces of Keane's relationship. Their relationship told a tale of both rosy-tinted romance and menacing malice. Eventually the pair wound up in court fighting over who was the real creator of the Big Eye paintings that shook the art world. Was it charming and gregarious Walter, or Margaret, his reclusive wife?

Walter and Margaret tied the knot in 1955 in Honolulu, Hawaii, both having been married before. According to Walter Keane's biography, they had met in San Francisco early that year. Walter, still an unknown artist at the time, claimed their first encounter occurred while he was exhibiting the portraits at an outdoor art exhibition. Allegedly, he had been inspired to paint them while living in post-war Berlin, after witnessing 'dirty, ragged little victims of the war'.

However, Margaret's account of the story is somewhat different. In her version of events, the couple were already married when Walter started selling the big-eyed paintings in the lobby of a beatnik club in San Francisco called The Hungry i. On one occasion, Margaret decided to accompany him. According to her, she was sitting in a corner while he was selling paintings, when somebody walked over and asked: 'Do you paint too?' At that moment, Margaret realised that Walter was taking the credit for her paintings. She confronted him that very night, but surprisingly, there were no repercussions. Walter continued to sell the paintings as if they were his. Why did Margaret agree to go along with his lies?

The fact is that the unsettling children with their huge eyes were an art sensation. The paintings were everywhere. Among the collectors were stars like Joan Crawford, Jerry Lewis, Kim Novak and Natalie Wood. According to The New York Times, the originals sold for up to $50,000 apiece. For those who couldn't afford these extortionate prices, postcards, posters and prints were available. As Walter was already believed to be the artist behind the big-eyed children, he feared that the truth would destroy the Keane's thriving new enterprise, and he managed to convert Margaret to his way of thinking. As a result, the Keanes raked in millions of dollars a year. Margaret, however, saw none of this. Granted, she lived in a pleasant, gated house with a swimming pool and servants, but while Walter lived the high life – travelling, drinking and philandering - she painted for 16 hours a day, her door locked and her curtains closed. Even the servants did not know about her secret life.

It was many years before Margaret finally spoke up. Unable to maintain the deception any longer, she separated from her husband and moved to Hawaii in 1965\. Five years later, she confessed on a radio show that every one of the "big-eyes" paintings was hers. 'Flabbergasted' Walter denied the allegations. The battle resulted in a 'paint off' in which the two artists were meant to display their painting skills in public. As it happened, Walter pleaded a shoulder injury and never painted. Law suits were filed and Margaret produced a piece of artwork before jurors that promptly settled the matter, and she was awarded $4 million in damages in 1986.

Studying the paintings, the verdict is not surprising. Never a melancholic man, Walter did not have the depth of character to produce such mournful works of art. Apparently, Margaret once attempted to teach him her craft, but his efforts failed miserably. Meanwhile, Margaret spent many of her childhood years in isolation, and her adult years trapped in an unhappy marriage. With this in mind, it makes sense that the naïve, dejected children are her creations. The pictures are not to everyone's taste though. Although the famous pop artist Andy Warhol famously quipped: 'It has to be good. If it were bad, so many people wouldn't like it', other art critics were much less favourable, terming them "saccharine kitsch madness" and "maudlin popular art." Generally speaking, the art world establishment turned up its nose at the paintings, but their criticisms did nothing to stop buyers from buying up everything from canvases to postcards.

And we are likely to see a resurgence of Big-Eyed mania as Tim Burton's movie hits the big screens later this year. A long-time fan of Margaret's work, Tim Burton is well-known for producing quirky yet slightly macabre films such as The Nightmare Before Christmas and Willy Wonka, so it is perhaps unsurprising that he has long been a fan of Margaret Keane's work. His film Big-Eyes promises to be rather less whimsical, but just as unsettling. Margaret, who plays a cameo role in the film as an old lady on a park bench, said that it was traumatic to see actress Amy Adams going through what she had gone through. Christoph Waltz, playing Walter, acts like him and sounds like him. Reliving the experience made her realise just how fantastic the film is.

### Watch the trailer here:
